---
date: 2021-04-10
title: Have You No Honor, Sir?
tags: ['Life', 'Career', 'Ethics', 'Philosophy', 'Programming', 'Business']
published: false
cover_image: ./images/ethics.jpg
canonical_url: false
description: My first run-in with unethical business practices in the tech industry.
filename: 'have-you-no-honor-sir'
---

Less than two months ago, I wrote [an article](https://jasonmcginty.surge.sh/blog/philadelphia/) detailing what I thought at the time was going to be the next step in my career: a position as an Android developer for [Rave Business Systems](https://www.ravebizz.com/). In this article, I'll explain exactly how wrong I was about this company.

If you read the previous article, you'll notice that I was excited to start a new career as a ***junior*** Android app developer. I emphasize ***junior*** for a reason. Keep that word in mind and we'll come back to it in a bit.

Rave recruits developers who may have some background in web development or some other area, but are generally brand new to the specific area of Android app development. Their 6-8 week training program is advertised as a way for these new Android developers to learn the specifics of this particular niche within the larger field of software engineering. Out of the seven trainees in my cohort, none of us had any prior experience with Android development other than a few of us having looked through some online tutorials in the weeks leading up to the beginning of the training program. The training program also happens to be paid, with the promise of a two-year contract at the end with a pretty nice paycheck. It's an enticing offer for a brand new junior developer struggling to break into the field and getting turned down a lot due to lack of experience, and it almost sounds too good to be true. As it turns out, it was too good to be true.

As part of the onboarding process, every Rave recruit agrees to the company's "resume modification process" in order to allow the company to better market us to their clients after the training period. I and all of my fellow trainees understood this to mean that the Rave team would tailor our resumes to the needs of the company's clients, incorporating the projects we completed during training and presenting our skills in the best light possible to potential employers. The true nature of the "resume modification process" was certainly not openly disclosed to us, I would assume both for legal reasons and because no one with a shred of honor or ethical sense would agree to it in advance if they really knew what it was.

During the fifth week of the training program, we were shown the resumes that the HR team had been working on for us. I was stunned to discover that from 2015-2017 I was actually not in naval flight school as I had previously thought, but working for Verizon Wireless as an Android developer! To my astonishment, this resume informed me that I actually have over 5 years' experience in Android development! That's right, Rave's "resume modification process" entails the complete and total fabrication of three entire jobs and five years' experience in the field. No wonder they aren't up front with their potential recruits. Besides the fake resume itself, the implication was also that I would be expected to lie to an interviewer to back up the lies on the fake resume when asked about them in an interview.

I was disgusted by this, and immediately voiced my displeasure to the instructor who showed me the resume. His first reaction was to inform me that this is what I agreed to when I signed up, but I stuck to my guns and said that I agreed to have my resume worked on and improved, but certainly did not and would never agree to having work experience completely fabricated. The instructor referred me to the CEO and said I should talk to him about it (it's a small startup, so you can do that kind of thing).

The CEO also told me that this was what I agreed to, and I again told him that this was most certainly not my understanding of what was going to happen when I signed up. His response to that was to tell me that I should have been able to tell exactly what the process was from the materials I was sent before joining. I know for sure that this is nonsense, because after asking my entire training cohort about this they all said they had the same understanding as I did about what the process would entail, and it didn't include making up fake resumes. There was certainly nothing in the materials I was sent before joining stating that I would be expected to outright lie about my job experience, and it's clear to me that the materials we were sent were just as dishonest as the fake resumes.

Let's get into a little speculation on my part. Based on what I've told you so far, you may ask, "But Jason, why does this company feel it's necessary to put five years' fake experience on a resume for entry-level developer roles? Shouldn't those roles be achievable with just the background in web development that most of us already have combined with the training given to us by the company?" Yes indeed, but remember when I emphasized that word ***junior*** a while ago? My *assumption* was that I'd be contracting for junior developer roles, because I'm a junior developer. The roles Rave contracts their employees out to are ***mid to senior level*** roles that *do* require 5+ years' experience in Android development specifically. This is why they feel the need to fabricate our qualifications, because otherwise we wouldn't even get looked at for the jobs they're applying us to.

What we have here is a company that preys on new developers, many fresh out of coding bootcamps, looking for their first jobs in the industry, and getting frustrated because their lack of experience is causing companies to pass them up time after time. Rave hires these developers with no experience, fabricates qualifications for them, and contracts them out to roles for which they are totally unqualified even after the training period, with promises of a support team to back them up when they inevitably find themselves out of their depth. These mid to senior level Android jobs can pay salaries in the low six figures. Rave pays the employee around $70,000 of this and pockets the rest, and this is how they make their money.
