---
date: 2021-04-10
title: Saruman's Tower of Babel
tags: ['J. R. R. Tolkien', 'Literature', 'The Lord of the Rings', 'Mythology', 'Symbolism']
published: false
cover_image: ./images/orthanc.jpg
canonical_url: false
description: The symbolism of Saruman and the Tower of Orthanc.
filename: 'sarumans-tower-of-babel'
---

> And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech. And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. And they said to one another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter. And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. And the Lᴏʀᴅ came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men builded. And the Lᴏʀᴅ said, Behold, the people is one, and they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand one another's speech. So the Lᴏʀᴅ scattered them abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city. Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lᴏʀᴅ did there confound the language of all the earth: and from thence did the Lᴏʀᴅ scatter them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

— Genesis 11:1-9

As I begin writing this, I've just finished reading Book Three of Herodotus' *The Histories* as the next step in the [OGB reading curriculum](https://onlinegreatbooks.com/). Herodotus of Halicarnassus lived in the fifth century BC and is commonly known as the father of history, his *Histories* being the oldest known surviving historical account of the Western world. This work recounts the history of interactions between the Hellenes (Greeks) and the surrounding peoples, especially the Persian Empire, from distant mythological times up through the Persian invasions of Hellas. The account begins with the preamble:

> Herodotus of Halicarnassus here presents his research so that human events do not fade with time. May the great and wonderful deeds—some brought forth by the Hellenes, others by the barbarians—not go unsung; as well as the causes that led them to make war on each other.

— Herodotus, *The Histories* Proem

Ever since reading Homer's *Iliad*, I've had a sense that there lives deep within every human being a desire to live on in the memory of others long after our mortal lives have ended. In the *Iliad* this is reflected in Achilles' choice to stay and die young and gloriously at Troy when he could have chosen to return home and live out a long, comfortable life and die an old man in obscurity. Over 3,000 years later we're still reading Achilles' story, so it's safe to say he achieved what he wanted. In the opening of *The Histories*, Herodotus takes on a different role, not as the one being remembered, but as the one ensuring that the deeds of others are remembered. As a byproduct of his efforts, Herodotus himself gets to be remembered far beyond his physical lifetime as well.

By reading and discussing Herodotus' account, we ourselves get to participate in Herodotus' mission. There is no story without an audience to hear it, and we are the audience now. Herodotus had a noble goal of ensuring that great deeds were recorded, but it is us, the audience, who must choose to read and engage with the story and ensure that his mission is fulfilled.

### What Exactly Is This Book, Anyway?

Despite the title, *The Histories* definitely straddles a line between history and mythology. I use the word "mythology" deliberately and in the highest possible sense as a type of story that tries to go beyond literal events in the physical world and tell us something about the world, or about humanity, more generally. Herodotus often tells us outright in his account that he is simply repeating rumors he has been told by others while on his travels throughout the known world. Many of these accounts have a highly fantastical flavor to them, like tales of Egyptian flying serpents, or of ants in India the size of small dogs that build gold-dust-infused anthills and attack people who try to collect the gold dust. Herodotus frequently expresses his own skepticism as to the truth of many of these rumors.

These wild stories are one thing, but it's probably even more important that the very geography of Herodotus' known world is structured in a mythological fashion. Hellas itself forms the center of the world for Herodotus and is the location of the most civilized and familiar people and customs. Heading further out towards the margins of the world one encounters Egypt and Persia, the other two major civilizations of the day, which are still fairly civilized but whose religious and societal customs are increasingly strange to the Hellenes. Even further out towards the margins one begins to encounter the true barbarians such as the Scythians to the north of the Black Sea, nomadic horse archer types whose name conjures up images of medieval Mongol hordes sweeping down upon peaceful Chinese villages. The Scythians live in a cruel, harsh climate and their culture reflects their environment: depending on the specific tribe, they practice human sacrifice of captured enemies, deal out beheadings for seemingly minor offenses, and consider it dishonorable for a man to go a full year without killing an enemy in battle.

As with other mythological structures of the world, the true monsters lie far out on the margins, beyond even the Scythians and people like them. Herodotus speaks of even more wild cultures to the north of the Scythians: barely-human nomads who have sex in public like animals and practice cannibalism, and in some cases may even be sorcerers or werewolves, literally blurring the line between human and animal. On another edge of the world, a Persian sea voyage past the Pillars of Herakles (Strait of Gibraltar) and into the Atlantic once brought back news of jungle pygmies somewhere along the west coast of Africa. On Egypt's southern border lie the Ethiopians, and beyond them the long-lived Ethiopians along the unexplored southern reaches of the Nile who are apparently borderline godlike, being the tallest and most handsome of all men who live absurdly long lives and regard the Egyptians as a normal human might regard a dog.

The point is that the world from the Hellenic point of view is structured in such a way that Hellas itself represents civilization, the known, the safe, and the familiar; while the edges of the known world represent chaos, the unknown, the dangerous, and the wild. There is a fairly smooth gradient of familiarity between the center and the margin.

On top of this structure of the world, Herodotus builds anecdotes about the structure and nature of human life. For example, he tells us about Polykrates, a ruler of the Hellenic island of Samos, who keeps enjoying ridiculously good fortune for so long that Amasis, the current king of Egypt, breaks off an alliance with him because he doesn't think it possible that one man could continue avoiding even minor setbacks for that long. Amasis thinks Polykrates' downfall is inevitable because the structure of a man's life is such that he experiences a mixed bag of fortune both good and bad, and Polykrates is far overdue for the bad half of his fortune. Amasis is proved correct when Polykrates is deceived by Oroites, the Persian governor of Sardis, and lured to Susa before being brutally killed. The account is full of tragic anecdotes like this where a man enjoys success, gets too cocky or commits some egregious affront to the gods, and then meets his untimely demise. This often comes along with stories of premonitory dreams, omens, prophecies, and other signs from the gods, many of which one might question how Herodotus could possibly have heard of in order to write them down.

In the midst of all this, Herodotus also tells us about historical events in the physical world, such as who is invading and conquering whom and why they decided to do so, which men are kings of which cities and regions, and information on the cultures and customs of far-flung nations like Egypt, Scythia, and Babylonia. The main narrative focuses on the Persian Empire and its interactions with the Hellenes, first tracing the roots of the empire in the Lydian, Median, and Assyrian cultures of the Near East and culminating with the Persian Wars. This narrative also takes on mythological significance as part of a larger cultural clash between East and West, as a continuation of the Homeric Trojan War, and as a portrayal of the cycle of an empire from its birth, through its height of flourishing, and ultimately to its corruption and death.

So what Herodotus gives us is something far beyond a mere accounting of historical events, and even beyond an investigation of the causes of and relationships between historical events, although he certainly gives us that as well. I'm sure someone smarter than me has come up with a name for this kind of thing, but in my head I've been calling it "mythtory". Pronounced like Mike Tyson is trying to tell you the genre of a Sherlock Holmes story.

### The Joy of Reading Herodotus

Herodotus looms large over the OGB seminars that haven't read him yet as the couple of months where you have an absurdly large amount of reading to do. This isn't wrong; we tackle the 722 pages of the [Landmark Herodotus edition](https://www.amazon.com/Landmark-Herodotus-Histories-Robert-Strassler/dp/1400031141) in just two months, with 490 of those pages in the first month alone. There's so much reading that for the first time in the program we are recommended to skim or skip parts of it just for the sake of getting it all done in the time allotted.

Despite the volume of reading, I've been thoroughly enjoying the time I've spent with Herodotus. In fact, I don't think any Great Book I've read so far matches *The Histories* in the department of simple, pure fun. When I began this article I had just finished Book Three, but it's been a few days since then and I'm now a fair ways into Book Four. If you're familiar with Herodotus, you'll know that at this point the main narrative has barely even gotten started yet and I'm already over 300 pages in. We've heard about the forming of the Persian Empire by Cyrus and his son Cambyses, how Darius took back the empire from the Magi after Cambyses' death, and about the very preliminary seeds of war between Darius and the Hellenes, but that's about it for the main narrative. It seems that every time Herodotus mentions a new people or location, he goes off on a long digression about the culture, history, geography, and/or customs of that people or location. At the end of Book One Cambyses prepares to invade and conquer Egypt after the death of Cyrus, but we don't actually hear about the war until Book Three because Book Two is almost entirely dedicated to the culture and history of Egypt.

Some people might find this kind of thing annoying, and I suppose it is a little annoying to pause the narrative on such a cliffhanger as the beginning of an invasion only to dedicate 86 pages to the history and culture of the nation being invaded before actually getting back to the invasion. Despite the minor annoyance though, I can't help but appreciate the thoroughness of it all. Herodotus tries to tell us absolutely everything he has learned about the people of the entire known world, using the Greco-Persian conflict as his backdrop. To me, the frequent lengthy digressions just add flavor and richness to the main narrative, like the author of a novel deeply delving into the backstories of each major character before telling you what happens to all of them. I find this stuff so enjoyable that I haven't skimmed or skipped any of it so far, despite having to work around the schedule of a new full-time job started a couple of weeks ago. I can't wait to see how it all comes together in the later books, and I'll probably add an addendum to this article once I've finished the whole thing.

Other Great Books might be arguably deeper, more philosophical, or more significant, but I also don't think you can discount the pure enjoyment factor of Herodotus. And despite what I just said in the last sentence, I wouldn't discount the significance of Herodotus either. Being the father of history is nothing to sneeze at.
